---
title: 'tusd v2: better hooks, network resilience and IETF protocol'
meta_description: 'Exactly four years after the last major release of tusd, version 1.0.0, it is time for another big announcement: we are happy to say that tusd v2 is finished!'
author: acconut
redirect_from: /blog/2023/09/20/tusd-200/
date: 2023-09-20
---

Exactly four years after the last major release of tusd,
[version 1.0.0](https://tus.io/blog/2019/09/20/tusd-100), it is time for another
big announcement: we are happy to say that tusd v2 is finished! The release is
ready for production and has been battle tested at scale at
[Transloadit](https://transloadit.com/) in the past months.
[tusd](https://github.com/tus/tusd) is our server implementation in Go for the
tus resumable upload protocol.

This major release focuses on two main aspects: **interoperability and
resilience**. The reworked hook system makes it easier to integrate tusd into
your application, while also extending its functionality. Furthermore, we
focused on the way tusd handles degraded network connectivity and made numerous
changes to improve its resilience in such circumstances. Besides these main
aspects, there are additional improvements, which are all described in the
following sections.

If you want to try out the new release, you can find the source code and
pre-built binaries on [GitHub](https://github.com/tus/tusd/releases/tag/v2.0.0).

Before going into more detail, we want to emphasize that there are **no breaking
changes in the HTTP interface for tus uploads**. Existing tus clients will
continue to be able to communicate with tusd, without any changes being
necessary. You can replace your tusd v1 deployments with v2, and all clients
will continue to function.

## Hook system

This major release includes an entirely reworked hook system. Hooks enable
bi-directional communication between the tus upload server and your main
application. During the lifecycle of an upload, events are emitted that can
notify your application whenever an upload is started or finished, or while data
is being transmitted. This allows for a tight integration of resumable uploads
into your system.

In the previous versions, this hook interface was mainly designed for
one-directional communication that flows from tusd to your main application.
Over time, we realized that this approach is too limited. Developers want to
also send feedback to tusd in order to reject uploads before they are created,
send fully customized error messages to the clients, and include additional
information in the responses once an upload is complete. tusd v1 did not have
proper support for these tasks.

With tusd v2, we have completely reworked the hook system, making it more
powerful than before:

- Hooks can be sent to your application via HTTP, gRPC, by invoking scripts, or
  by loading plugins into tusd. Plugins are a new and efficient hook provider,
  allowing you to write callbacks using Go and load them into tusd.
- Hooks can fully customize every HTTP response that is sent from tusd to the
  tus clients. This includes the status code, header fields, and the response
  body for success and error cases.
- Hooks can reject an upload creation, for example if validation of the meta
  data fails or the user is not authorized.
- Hooks can stop ongoing uploads to avoid unnecessary resource consumption, for
  example if an underlying resource is no longer available.
- Hooks can customize the upload ID and its meta data when a new upload is
  created, influencing its storage destination.

To demonstrate its new capabilities, here is an example for an HTTP server
written in Python 3, that validates whether the client provided the filename via
meta data. If not, a custom error response is sent to the client. If validation
passes, the server instructs tusd to use a specific ID for this upload and to
store the creation time in the meta data.

```python
from http.server import HTTPServer, BaseHTTPRequestHandler
from io import BytesIO

import json
import time
import uuid

class HTTPHookHandler(BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_POST(self):
        # Read entire body as JSON object
        content_length = int(self.headers['Content-Length'])
        request_body = self.rfile.read(content_length)
        hook_request = json.loads(request_body)

        # Prepare hook response structure
        hook_response = {
            'HTTPResponse': {
                'Headers': {}
            }
        }

        # Use the pre-create hook to check if a filename has been supplied
        # using metadata. If not, the upload is rejected with a custom HTTP response.
        # In addition, a custom upload ID with a choosable prefix is supplied.
        # Metadata is configured, so that it only retains the filename meta data
        # and the creation time.
        if hook_request['Type'] == 'pre-create':
            metaData = hook_request['Event']['Upload']['MetaData']
            isValid = 'filename' in metaData
            if not isValid:
                hook_response['RejectUpload'] = True
                hook_response['HTTPResponse']['StatusCode'] = 400
                hook_response['HTTPResponse']['Body'] = 'no filename provided'
            else:
                hook_response['ChangeFileInfo'] = {}
                hook_response['ChangeFileInfo']['ID'] = f'prefix-{uuid.uuid4()}'
                hook_response['ChangeFileInfo']['MetaData'] = {
                    'filename': metaData['filename'],
                    'creation_time': time.ctime(),
                }

        # Send the data from the hook response as JSON output
        response_body = json.dumps(hook_response)
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(response_body.encode())


httpd = HTTPServer(('localhost', 8000), HTTPHookHandler)
httpd.serve_forever()
```

Once this hook server has been started, you run tusd and send hooks to it:

```sh
$ tusd -hooks-http http://localhost:8000
```

This only scratches the surface of what is possible now, and we encourage you to
check out the additional
[examples](https://github.com/tus/tusd/tree/main/examples) in the repository. It
includes code for HTTP and gRPC servers, scripts, and the new plugin system
covering a variety of use cases. You can read more about the new hook system in
the [documentation](https://github.com/tus/tusd/blob/main/docs/hooks.md). If you
are already using hooks, upgrading to tusd v2 is simple. The structure of the
hook information has changed slightly, but still provides all the data like
before.

## Network resilience

Tusd must accept large uploads, even over unreliable network connections. It
must therefore be resilient to various kinds of network issues and
interruptions. For tusd v2, we worked on improvements in this area as well.

A new **end-to-end test suite** has been developed that simulates various
network conditions, such as slow upload speeds, dead connections, and concurrent
requests. It allows us to observe tusd's behavior and asserts its correctness in
these situations. This test suite has been central in our latest efforts to
ensure that the tusd v2 release is ready for production.

In the past, concurrent upload requests have proven an especially tricky topic.
tusd does not support concurrent requests to the same upload resource, as
parallel writes could trigger data loss. This rule is enforced through locks,
which must be acquired before accessing or modifying an upload. While this
solves the problem of concurrent access, it creates another one: when an ongoing
upload is interrupted by network issues, the server might be unaware of this
interruption. It could then assume that the upload is still continuing and thus
hold on to the upload lock. The client, on the other hand, might realize this
interruption and abandon the previous upload request to resume the upload. This
resumption would fail, because the upload is still locked from the previous
request until the connection times out. Depending on the setup, such a timeout
can be lengthy, which is likely to cause annoyances for the end users.

As a solution, tusd v2 allows new requests to ask previous requests to the same
upload resource to release their upload lock in a controlled and safe manner.
This solves the problem of locked uploads during resumption, while also ensuring
no data corruption. You can read more on the topic of upload locks in the
[corresponding documentation](https://github.com/tus/tusd/blob/main/docs/locks.md).

## Support for the new IETF protocol

As we shared in previous blog posts, we are actively working with the HTTP
working group of the Internet Engineering Taskforce (IETF) on a
[new standard for resumable file uploads](/blog/2023/08/09/resumable-uploads-ietf).
With an official standard, support for resumable uploads could be added directly
on browsers, proxies, HTTP servers, and mobile platforms. While development is
still ongoing and the document remains a draft for now, tusd already offers
preliminary support for this new, experimental protocol. It serves as a
playground in which you can explore and test out the standard while we are
writing it. However, neither the specification nor its implementation are ready
for production use yet. More details on the overall journey and the future of
tus are available in our
[previous blog post](/blog/2023/08/09/resumable-uploads-ietf).

If you want to give it a try, the experimental protocol can be enabled via the
`-enable-experimental-protocol` flag:

```sh
$ tusd -enable-experimental-protocol
```

tusd will then accept traditional tus uploads, while simultaneously supporting
uploads via the new protocol at the same endpoint. A list of compatible clients
with corresponding examples is also available at
[github.com/tus/draft-example](https://github.com/tus/draft-example/). If you
have any feedback, feel free to reach out to us!

## Further improvements

Besides an improved hook system and more resilience, tusd v2 also includes
enhancements in the following areas:

- **Parts are uploaded in parallel to AWS S3.** To implement S3-backed resumable
  upload, tusd splits an upload into multiple parts and transfers each part
  individually to S3, using its
  [multipart uploading functionality](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/mpuoverview.html).
  In tusd v2, the part transfers are now parallelized to achieve higher
  throughput for the end user.
- **Graceful shutdown.** Upon receiving a signal to shut down (i.e., SIGINT,
  SIGTERM or Ctrl+C), tusd will now attempt a graceful exit: it first stops
  accepting new connections before ending all open uploads, while giving the
  storages enough time to save all buffered data. This reduces data loss and
  makes reloading tusd more efficient.
- **Online profiling support.** Powered by Go's
  [pprof package](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http/pprof), you can now profile the
  CPU and memory usage of tusd while it is running – even in production with
  little overhead! This can be enabled using the new `-expose-pprof` option.
- **Updated dependencies.** As with every release, we upgraded all dependencies
  to their latest versions to ensure that we include all available stability and
  security fixes.

## Breaking changes

Unfortunately, this release also brings along a few breaking changes. Affected
users are required to adjust their tusd installation, even though the necessary
changes should be minimal.

- **Require Go 1.20:** Our upgrade policy dictates that we always support the
  last two major releases of Go. As of the release of tusd v2, these are Go 1.20
  and 1.21. Earlier versions are no longer supported. If you are building tusd
  on your own or using it as a package, please ensure that you are using one of
  these versions.
- **For users of tusd as a CLI:**
  - Flags that specify a duration have a new syntax: before v2, their value was
    parsed as the number of milliseconds (e.g., `-duration=6000`). Now, the
    value is parsed as a number with an attached unit of time (e.g.,
    `-duration=6s`).
  - The `-timeout` flag has been renamed to `-network-timeout` to better
    describe its actual effect.
  - As mentioned above, the structure of the data provided in hooks has slightly
    changed. Please consult the
    [hook system documentation](https://github.com/tus/tusd/blob/main/docs/hooks.md#hook-requests-and-responses)
    for the updated structure.
  - The default port changed from 1080 to 8080 to align with common HTTP ports.
    If you want to keep using the previous port, please specify it manually
    using `-port=1080`.
- **For users of tusd as a package:**
  - The `Config.DisableCors` field has been removed in favor of the more
    complete
    [`Config.Cors` option](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/tus/tusd/v2/pkg/handler#Config),
    which allows you to adjust all CORS-related aspects of your handler.
  - The `s3store` has been upgraded to use the newer AWS SDK for Go v2. Please
    check the corresponding
    [migration guide](https://aws.github.io/aws-sdk-go-v2/docs/migrating/) to
    upgrade from the AWS SDK for Go v1.
  - The data stores are now required to return an `io.ReadCloser` (instead of
    just an `io.Reader`) for `GetReader` calls when a client wants to download a
    file. The additional close functionality is used to better clean up
    resources.

That being said, tusd v2 does not introduce a breaking change for its HTTP
interface. All current tus clients can be used without modifications with tusd
v2. Tusd can be seamlessly upgraded in production from v1 to v2, without changes
to the clients.

## Future development

With the v2 release out of the door, we are already thinking about the future
development of tusd. Our next point of focus will be to add support for the
expiration and checksum extensions to tusd, so that all extensions from the
specification are implemented. With the
[expiration extension](/protocols/resumable-upload#expiration), tusd will be
able to clean up unfinished and/or finished uploads after an expiration period,
to ensure unused resources are available again. With the
[checksum extension](/protocols/resumable-upload#checksum), the server can
verify the integrity of the uploaded file by comparing it to client-provided
checksums and thereby detect any transmission errors. In addition to those two
extensions, we also want to make vertical scaling of tusd easier. Right now,
running a tusd cluster can be [challenging](/faq#how-do-i-scale-tus) and we want
to explore multiple ideas on how to make this easier.

## Thank you

Finally, we want to thank all contributors who dedicated their time and efforts
towards this release. It would not be possible without you!
